By: Sello Theletsane Gayton McKenzie-led Patriotic Alliance (PA) is taking South Africa by storm. The PA, which has grown exponentially lately, has been joined by many influential local community leaders and councillors, mostly from the Democratic Alliance (DA). The PA is now spreading its tentacles in all nine provinces of the country. In the North West, the party has announced an influential young woman, Gareth Brown, a communications and marketing strategist as the party’s mayoral candidate for Klerksdorp in the forthcoming local government elections. Brown was born and raised in Klerksdorp where she spent her entire schooling at St’ Conrads College. After matriculating, she moved to Johannesburg to study Chemical engineering at Wits Technicon. She is a former beauty queen, with many titles like Miss Teen Klerksdorp, Miss Wits Tech, Miss Black Like Me, Miss Teen SA Finalist and a Miss South Africa Finalist. Brown is a professional, dynamic, impeccably presented and driven individual with vast experience in marketing and some background knowledge in chemical engineering. Brown says her new political career is proof that nothing can stand in her way of making a positive impact in the people’s lives. This BComm graduate in Marketing Management, entrepreneur, creative director, producer, broadcaster and blogger worked her way up in companies like Media Fusion, Wolla Music, African Bank, and SABC until she landed the post of Marketing Manager at the Intercontinental Hotels. Passionate about positive development of young girls, Brown runs the Miss High School SA pageant and is the founder of the Girl Power Foundation – a youth and young adults mentorship program, that is committed to “Helping girls succeed in the classroom, the workplace and in the real world”. This collaborative team player, meticulous reviewer, persuasive communicator, independent thinker and motivational leader is determined to effect changes in the people’s lives through the PA, her new political home. McKenzie was escatic about his latest big catch. “We are introducing a new way of politics – that of making tangible changes in our people’s lives.” “The Patriotic Alliance has a proud track record of making meaningful changes in our communities, even in several places where we are not in government. This is what resonates with many South Africans and something that explains our massive growth.” Click here to watch Gareth Brown explains why she chose the Patriotic Alliance