By: Richard Chaka From the analysis, the document is clearly a smear targeting Minister Lindiwe Sisulu, and peppering praises for David Mahlobo. To understand the analysis process that draws us to the conclusion, we will first start with an analysis of the entities mentioned in the document, sentiment of the mentions, and the narrative arch. Entities in the document:  Sentiment  & 2x CIA     The major actors in the article are David Mahlobo, who received the highest number of mentions, and Jacob Zuma. Sentiment ratio analysis skews the data between two persons, with David Mahlobo receiving the highest ration of POSITIVE sentiment, and Minister Sisulu getting the highest number of NEGATIVE sentiment. Jacob Zuma gets high NEGATIVE sentiments as well, but he is not the main protagonist in the story. The document has clearly been drafted to project Mr Mahlobo as victim of some plots, and a “clean” person, but attacks Minister Sisulu. The rest of the actors and persons in the story are nothing but actors to fill in the gaps of the document. The propaganda tactic used has been to obfuscate as much as possible, and overload as much information as they can to the people in order to hide its intent. The document has no central story, or narrative, but rambles on about different incoherent sub-scences, and sub-themes of a “meeting” which had no objective. A lot of red flags light up immediately when you look at the persons mentioned, and whether or not they participate in this “fake” meeting. Fikile Mbalula receives only one mention, that he was at this “fake” meeting – and there is no mention of him ever speaking even once, in this long document. Some of the extracts to expose that this is a David Mahlobo generated propaganda: Cyril Ramaphosa, o Mahlobo is presented as a victim of “passionate hated” by Sisulu o Mahlobo, once more, is presented as someone who refused to pay R30m from SSA. Being presented as someone who was guarding the state funds.  The whole document was focused on Mahlobo, while smearing Minister Sisulu. So it is safe to conclude that it is a Mahlobo’s poorly crafted propaganda – but the propaganda is too sophisticated for an untrained eye.