By: Sello Theletsane Indunankulu of the Nguni Council Phumlani kaDoto Mfeka has condemned “in the strongest terms the frivolous attack on iNduna uMgiliji Nhleko launched by Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi”. Buthelezi reportedly launched an attack on Nhleko who led a Zulu regiment this weekend to former President Jacob Zuma’s home in Nkandla. Buthelezi accused Nhleko of acting in defiance of the Zulu King Misuzulu ka Zwelithini’s orders. Mfeka warned Buthelezi: “The Prime Minister of the Zulu Nation is really testing our restraint as INJEJE yabeNGUNI Council.” Added Mfeka: “His divisive statements on the going ons in Nkandla are unnecessary especially since he also is an honorary President of a political formation.” Mfeka said the IziNduna of the Zulu Nation have historically taken decisions whenever the Zulu King seemed indecisive to do so. He mentioned the Battle of eSandlwana and the Battle kaBambatha as examples. “As was announced by the Zulu Royal family, the Zulu throne remains vacant thus iziNduna that are apolitical are our primary point of call.” “We are thus sincerely disturbed that an elder statesman and Prime Minister of the Zulu Nation who has been accustomed to Zulu customs and protocols for close to a century would use a media platform to address grievances he may have with the Commander of Regiments. We would have expected him to call uMdidiyeli uNhleko to a meeting with other iziNduna present where matters should have been discussed without involving the media, it is at this sitting that the Prime Minister would have had to articulate to the attendance what wrong did the Commander do? Mfeka said for the longest time it has been known that former President Zuma is a member of amaButho “and has innumerous times accompanied the late King on many occasions in this very capacity, some occasions Prince Buthelezi would be present and has never shown nor stated this to be unbecoming thus it is disingenuous of him to today turnaround and act as if the regiments that descended on Nkandla were not there to defend one of their own”. “INJEJE applauds and commends in uMdidiyeli for providing leadership for the Zulu regiments and people of eNkandla when there was no one else to do so.” “It is very unfortunate that Prince Buthelezi has used his position as Prime Minister of the Zulu Nation to pursue his personal narrow unsustainable political agendas at the expense of the Zulu people to which this has become unbearable. We have afforded the Prime Minister every form of respect he deserves yet it seems this respect has given him the impression that we have outsourced out intelligence to him.” “It has given him the impression that the Zulu people are incapable of determining their future without his dictates.” Added Mfeka: “He has perforce turned the position of Prime Minister to be a toothless office that seeks to use the Monarch and the Zulu Royal family for self-centered intentions. We will not remain silent whilst he continues to tear apart and divide the Zulu throne, family and nation intentionally.” Mfeka said Buthelezi has had his time to provide leadership and nature afforded him all the time to do so, “however it is time that he allows the current Zulu generation to charter their own future without his politically driven medling using the Zulu Monarchy, Zulu Royal family and the office of Prime Minister as cover”. “May the Prime Minister resist the ever arching crave of cameras and microphones as whenever he sits infront of these, he consistently tarnishes the Zulu name.” “Commander uMgiliji has the full backing of INJEJE yabeNGUNI and we encourage him to remain resolute in providing leadership for the Zulu Nation in these times of difficulty and siege, this is what the late King uMdlokombane had appointed him for and for this we thank him.”